---
title: "Chapter 1: Types of AI and Turing Test"
description: "Classification of AI systems, different approaches to AI development, and the Turing Test as a measure of intelligence"
authors:
  - "Andrea Lunghi"
  - "Niccolò Papini"
slug: "types-of-ai-and-turing-test"
---

When we talk about intelligence we can define it based on two factors:

- **Performance**: The measure of how well an AI system functions
  - **Human Performance**: Measured by how closely the AI's behavior resemble those of humans
  - **Rational Performance**: Measured by how effectively the AI achieves its goals
- **Approach**: The method employed by the AI to achieve its performance goals
  - **Think**: Focuses on internal cognitive processes, aiming to replicate or simulate human or logical thought.
  - **Act**: Focuses on observable behavior, regardless of the underlying thought process.

Based on those factors, we can define four categories of AI, displayed as a 2x2 matrix:

| Approach \ Performance | Human            | Rational            |
| ---------------------- | ---------------- | ------------------- |
| Think                  | Thinking Humanly | Thinking Rationally |
| Act                    | Acting Humanly   | Acting Rationally   |

## Thinking Humanly

This approach aims to create AI that thinks like a human. This is the goal of the **Cognitive Modeling** approach, which involves creating a computer model of human cognitive processes.

To achieve this, we need to understand how humans think, which can be done through **Cognitive Science**. This field combines insights from psychology, neuroscience, and linguistics, philosophy to understand how humans think.

## Thinking Rationally

This approach aims to create AI that thinks logically. This is the goal of the **Laws of Thought** approach, which involves creating AI that can reason logically.

To achieve this, we need to understand how to reason logically, which can be done through **Logic** and _formal notation_.

## Acting Humanly

This approach aims to create AI that acts like a human, ignoring the process behind it.

To test this, we can use the **Turing Test**, which involves a human interacting with a computer and another human, without knowing which is which. If the human can't tell the difference, the AI passes the test.

This test give us 6 skill about the intelligence tested:

- **Natural Language Processing**: The ability to communicate in natural language.
- **Knowledge Representation**: The ability to store and retrieve information.
- **Automated Reasoning**: The ability to solve problems.
- **Machine Learning**: The ability to learn from experience.
- **Computer Vision**: The ability to perceive objects.
- **Robotics**: The ability to act on the environment.

## Acting Rationally

This approach aims to create a **Rational Agent**, which is an AI that acts to achieve the best outcome based on its goals.

## Types of AI

We can classify AI based on their capabilities:

- **Weak AI**: AI that perform as well as humans.
- **Strong AI**: AI that replicate exactly how humans think.
- **General AI**: Ai that can solve a variety of tasks.
