---
title: "Chapter 6: Logical Agents"
description: "Knowledge representation, propositional logic, first-order logic, and logical reasoning"
authors:
  - "Andrea Lunghi"
  - "Niccolò Papini"
slug: "logical-agents"
---

The central component of a logical agent is the **Knowledge Base** (KB) that contains the knowledge of the agent as a set of sentences in a formal language called _knowledge representation language_.

The agent can perform two types of operations:

- **Tell**: Add a sentence to the KB.
- **Ask**: Query the KB to check if a sentence is true.

At the beginning the kb has a set of **axioms** that are the initial knowledge of the agent.

During the _ask_ operation, the agent can perform **Inference** to derive new sentences from the KB based on what has been _tell(ed)_.

The agent is based on three steps:

1. _Tell_ the kb what it perceives.
2. _Ask_ the kb what to do. During this phase extensive reasoning can be performed.
3. _Tell_ the kb what action was chosen.

```python
# counter that indicates time
t = 0

def KB_AGENT(percept)
"""
    return an action
"""
    KB.tell(MAKE_PERCEPT_SENTENCE(percept, t))
    action = KB.ask(MAKE_ACTION_QUERY(t))
    KB.tell(MAKE_ACTION_SENTENCE(action, t))

    t += 1

    return action
```

## 6.1 Logic

The sentences are expressed according to the **Syntax** of the language, which is the set of rules that define the structure of the sentences.

The **Semantics** of the language is the meaning of the sentences. The semantics is defined by the **Model** of the language, which is a set of mathematical abstractions that has fixed values for every relevant sentence.

If a sentence ($\alpha$) is true in a model ($m$), we say that $m$ **satisfies\* $\alpha$, or $m$**is a model of\*\* $\alpha$. We write $M(\alpha)$ to indicate all the models that satisfy $\alpha$.

If a sentence is true in all the models, we say that the sentence is **valid** or **tautology**.

A sentence is **satisfiable** if there is at least one model that satisfies the sentence.

A sentence is **unsatisfiable** if there is no model that satisfies the sentence.

Given two sentences $\alpha$ and $\beta$, if every model of $\alpha$ is also a model of $\beta$, we say that $\beta$ **follows logically** $\alpha$, or $\alpha$ **entails** $\beta$.

$$\alpha \models \beta \iff M(\alpha) \subseteq M(\beta)$$

If $\alpha \models \beta$ and $\beta \models \alpha$, we say that $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are **logically equivalent** and we write $\alpha \equiv \beta$.

$$\alpha \equiv \beta \iff \alpha \models \beta \land \beta \models \alpha$$

Using entails we can carry out **Logical Inference**, which is the process of deriving new sentences from the KB. This process is done by an inference algorithm ($i$). If an inference algorithm can derive a sentence $\beta$ from a KB, we write $KB \vdash_i \beta$ ($\alpha$ is derived by $KB$ by $i$).

An inference algorithm can be:

- **Soundness**: An inference algorithm is sound if it only derives sentences that are logically entailed by the KB. In simpler terms, a sound algorithm does not produce any "false positives" or incorrect inferences based on the provided information.
  $$KB \vdash_i \beta \implies KB \models \beta$$
- **Complete**: An inference algorithm is complete if it can derive all the sentences that are logically entailed by the KB. In other words, a complete algorithm does not miss any "true positives" or valid inferences that can be made from the available information.
  $$KB \models \beta \implies KB \vdash_i \beta$$

## 6.2 Propositional Logic

**Propositional Logic** is a type of logic that deals with propositions, which are statements that can be true or false.

### 6.2.1 Syntax

The syntax of propositional logic is defined by the following elements:

- **Propositional Symbols**: $P, Q, R, ...$
- **Connectives**: $\neg$ (negation), $\land$ (conjunction), $\lor$ (disjunction), $\implies$ (implication), $\iff$ (biconditional).

A sentence is based on:

- **Atomic Sentence**: A sentence that contains only a propositional symbol.
- **Complex Sentence**: A sentence that contains a connective and one or more sentences.

The **Well-Formed Formula** (WFF) is a sentence that is correctly formed according to the syntax of the language.

### 6.2.2 Semantics

The semantics of propositional logic is defined by the **Truth Table** that defines the truth value of a complex sentence based on the truth values of the atomic sentences.

### 6.2.3 Inference

One way to perform inference is with **Model-Checking** that enumerates all the models and checks if the $\alpha$ is true in all the models where the KB is true.

A general algorithm is the **Truth Table Enumeration** that generates all the models and checks if the KB entails $\alpha$.

```python
def TT_ENTAILS(KB, alpha)
"""
    return true if KB entails alpha
"""
    symbols = SYMBOLS(KB, alpha)
    return TT_CHECK_ALL(KB, alpha, symbols, {})

def TT_CHECK_ALL(KB, alpha, symbols, model)
"""
    return true if KB entails alpha
"""
    if not symbols
        # check if a sentence is true in a model
        if PL_TRUE(KB, model)
            return PL_TRUE(alpha, model)
        else
            # when KB is false, alpha is true
            return True
    else
        P = symbols.pop()
        return (TT_CHECK_ALL(KB, alpha, symbols, extend(model, P, True)) and
                TT_CHECK_ALL(KB, alpha, symbols, extend(model, P, False)))
```

This algorithm is sound an complete, but it is not efficient because it has an exponential time complexity.

## 6.3 Propositional Theorem Proving

**Propositional Theorem Proving** is the process of deriving new sentences from the KB using inference rules. This is done without consulting models.

One way to perform theorem proving is with a technique called _reductio ad absurdum_, or proof by **refutation**. This technique is based on the fact that $\alpha \models \beta$ if and only if $\alpha \land \neg \beta$ is unsatisfiable.

$$\alpha \models \beta \iff \alpha \land \neg \beta \text{ is unsatisfiable}$$

### 6.3.1 Inference Rules

There are different inference rules that can be used to derive new sentences from the KB:

- **Modus Ponens**: If $\alpha$ and $\alpha \implies \beta$ are true, then $\beta$ is true.
  $$\frac{\alpha, \alpha \implies \beta}{\beta}$$
- **And-Elimination**: If $\alpha \land \beta$ is true, then $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are true.
  $$\frac{\alpha \land \beta}{\alpha} \quad \frac{\alpha \land \beta}{\beta}$$

Those inference rules are sound.

### 6.3.2 Resolution

**Resolution** is a sound and complete inference rule that can be used to derive new sentences from the KB.

The KB should be in **Conjunctive Normal Form** (CNF), which is a conjunction of disjunctions of literals, or a conjunction of **clauses** (disjunction of literals).

The _resolution_ takes two clauses with a **complementary literal** ($\not \alpha$ and $\alpha$) and produce a new clause called **resolvent**. If one of the clauses is only one literal it's called _unit resolution_.

$$C = (C_1 - \{l\}) \cup (C_2 - \{\neg l\})$$

$$\frac{P \lor Q, \neg P}{Q} \quad \frac{P \lor Q, \neg P \lor R}{Q \lor R}$$

To show that a sentence $\alpha$ is entailed by the KB, we use the principle of proof by contradiction and we show that $KB \land \neg \alpha$ is unsatisfiable.

The resolution algorithm is based on the resolution rule and it works by generating new clauses from the KB and the negation of the sentence. The algorithm ends if:

- The empty clause is generated, which means that the sentence is entailed by the KB ($KB \models \alpha$).
- No new clauses can be generated, which means that the sentence is not entailed by the KB ($KB \not\models \alpha$).

```python
def PL_RESOLUTION(KB, alpha)
"""
    return true if KB entails alpha
"""
    clauses = CONVERT_TO_CNF(KB) + CONVERT_TO_CNF(~alpha)
    new = set()

    while True
        for c_i in clauses
            for c_j in clauses
                resolvents = PL_RESOLVE(c_i, c_j)

                if resolvents is empty
                    return True

                new = new.union(resolvents)

        if new.issubset(clauses)
            return False

        clauses = clauses.union(new)
```

An **Horn Clause** is a clause that has at most one positive literal. A special type of Horn Clause is the **Definite Clause**, which has exactly one positive literal. Definite clauses can be written as implications.

### 6.3.3 Forward and Backward Chaining

**Forward Chaining** is a theorem proving algorithm that starts from a KB of definite clauses and tries to derive new sentences until the query is found.

Forward chaining is **Data-Driven** because it starts from the data and tries to derive new sentences.

The algorithm works by maintaining a list of the sentences that are true and a list of the sentences that are false. The algorithm iterates over the sentences that are true and tries to derive new sentences until the query is found.

```python
def PL_FC_ENTAILS(KB, q)
"""
    return true if KB entails q
"""
    count = {c: len(c) for c in KB} # how many implications are left to be true
    inferred = {c: False for c in KB}   # if the symbols has been inferred
    queue = [c for c in KB]    # list of the symbols that are true but not yet processed

    while queue
        p = queue.pop()
        if p == q
            return True

        if not inferred[p]
            inferred[p] = True

            for c in KB
                if p in c
                    count[c] -= 1
                    if count[c] == 0
                        queue.append(c)

    return False
```

This algorithm is sound and complete and it's linear in the size of the KB, but can do works irrelevant to the goal.

The **Backward Chaining** is a theorem proving algorithm that starts from the query and tries to derive the KB.
This algorithm is **Goal-Driven** because it starts from the goal and tries to derive the KB.

## 6.4 Propositional Model Checking

### 6.4.1 DPLL Algorithm

The **Davis-Putnam-Logemann-Loveland** (DPLL) algorithm is similar to TT_ENTAILS but it is more efficient because it uses a **Backtracking Search**. There are three advantages of DPLL over TT_ENTAILS:

- _Early Termination_: The algorithm can decide if a sentences is satisfiable or unsatisfiable with a partial model. $(A \lor B) \land (\neg C \lor A)$ is satisfiable with {$A = True$} and is unsatisfiable with {$A = False$, }.
- _Pure Symbol Heuristic_: The algorithm can select the symbols that are always true or always false in all clauses. This allows to reduce the search space because the algorithm can assign a value to the symbol without exploring the other branches.
- _Unit Clause Heuristic_: The algorithm can assign a value to a symbol if the symbol appears only once in a clause. $(A \lor B) \land (\neg C)$ in this case $C$ is false.

The algorithm works by assigning a value to a symbol and then propagating the constraints. If the assignment is consistent, the algorithm continues with the next symbol. If the assignment is not consistent, the algorithm backtracks and tries a different value.

```python
def DPLL_SATISFIABLE(s)
"""
    return true if the sentence is satisfiable
"""
    clauses = CONVERT_TO_CNF(s)
    symbols = SYMBOLS(s)

    return DPLL(clauses, symbols, {})

def DPLL(clauses, symbols, model)
"""
    return true if the sentence is satisfiable
"""
    # check if all the clauses are true with the current model
    if clauses.every(lambda c: IS_TRUE(c, model))
        return True

    # check if there is a clause that is false with the current model
    if clauses.some(lambda c: IS_FALSE(c, model))
        return False

    P, value = FIND_PURE_SYMBOL(symbols, clauses, model)
    if P is not None
        return DPLL(clauses, symbols - P, extend(model, P, value)) # repeat assigning the value to the pure symbol

    P, value = FIND_UNIT_CLAUSE(clauses, model)
    if P is not None
        return DPLL(clauses, symbols - P, extend(model, P, value)) # repeat assigning the value to the unit clause

    P = symbols.pop()

    # try assigning true and false to the symbol
    return DPLL(clauses, symbols, extend(model, P, True)) or DPLL(clauses, symbols, extend(model, P, False))
```

Some enhancements to the DPLL algorithm are:

- **Component Analysis**: The algorithm can divide the clauses into disjoint subsets called **components** and solve them separately.
- **Variable and Value Ordering**: The algorithm can use a heuristic to select the variable to assign and the value to assign. An example is the _degree heuristic_ that selects the variable that appears in the most clauses.
- **Intelligent Backtracking**: The algorithm stores the conflicts and avoid to repeat them.
- **Clever Indexing**: speed up the search by indexing the clauses based on the things like clauses where a variable appears as positive or negative.

## 6.5 First-Order Logic

**First-Order Logic** is a type of logic that extends propositional logic, focussing on the relationships between objects.

### 6.5.1 Syntax

The syntax of first-order logic is defined by the following elements:

- **Constants**: $A, B, C, ...$
- **Variables**: $x, y, z, ...$
- **Functions**: $F, G, H, ...$. Each function has an _arity_ that is the number of arguments.

A **Term** is a logical expression that refers to an object. A term can be a constant, a variable, or a function applied to a list of terms.

A sentence is based on:

- **Atomic Sentence**: A sentence that contains a predicate and a list of terms.
- **Complex Sentence**: A sentence that contains a connective and one or more sentences.

Instead of enumerate the objects by name we can use **Quantifiers** to express properties of an entire collection of objects.

- **Universal Quantifier** ($\forall$): The sentence is true for all the objects.
- **Existential Quantifier** ($\exists$): The sentence is true for at least one object.

Those quantifiers are equivalent and can be expressed in terms of the other.

$$\forall x \alpha \equiv \neg \exists x \neg \alpha$$
$$\exists x \alpha \equiv \neg \forall x \neg \alpha$$

We can also use **Equality** to express that two terms are equal.

### 6.6 Knowledge Engineering Process

The process of creating a knowledge base is called **Knowledge Engineering**. This process is based on the following steps:

1. **Identify the questions**: Determine the range of questions the knowledge base should answer and the type of information available for each problem.
2. **Assemble the relevant knowledge**: Gather all necessary information about the domain, potentially working with experts.
3. **Decide on a vocabulary**: Translate domain concepts into logical predicates, functions, and constants, creating the domain's ontology (a theory of existence).
4. **Encode general knowledge**: Write axioms that define the meaning of the vocabulary terms.
5. **Encode the problem instance**: Describe the specific problem using atomic sentences based on the established ontology.
6. **Pose queries and get answers**: Use an inference procedure to derive answers from the axioms and problem-specific facts.
7. **Debug and evaluate**: Correct errors in the knowledge base by identifying missing or incorrect axioms. Missing axioms lead to incomplete reasoning, while incorrect axioms are false statements about the world. This debugging process differs from traditional program debugging as errors are often logical inconsistencies rather than simple code errors.
